# Metaverse Economics and Finances

## Growing Economy
In this initial period, the metaverse is dominated by the gaming industry but other industries are steadily picking up the pace. Ultimately, Metaverse will evolve to resemble a digital twin of the real world — across all facets of life and across most existing and some not-yet-existing industries — finance, healthcare, sports, gaming, music, real estate, etc. The metaverse will be a collection of multiple micro-economies consisting of producers and consumers of goods and services, just like the real world. Various stakeholders of this economy will be interacting with each other to facilitate the flow of capital and job creation. This new economy will span over virtual and physical worlds, allowing people to engage across boundaries of various worlds. The stakeholders of these economies are responsible for the value creation and extraction and not any centralized authority. Economies like these are called self-sovereign circular economies {cite}`mitselmakher_2021`.

Currently, the majority of the virtual worlds in metaverse are operating with a close source Web 2.0 ecosystem. This ecosystem consists of subscription-based models or advertising revenue models. There are certain limitations that are imposed on developers and users in the Web 2.0 virtual worlds. In the case of the developer, each piece of software built have to follow the platform's standard, can't be plugged into the platform without API, and the revenue generated have to be shared with the platform. While in the case of users, connections, assets and achievements can't be ported to other platforms, inability to monetize on their character's achievements and inability to participate without approval from a central authority or intermediary. On the other hand in Web 3.0 architecture, virtual worlds will be open ecosystems where ideas and products will be open source, released and monetize, independently by ecosystem members {cite}`mitselmakher_2021`. A lot of projects are picking up to develop Web 3.0-based virtual worlds since the value will be captured by stakeholders rather than a centralized entity. The future metaverse will be similar to the real in many aspects and there is a possibility that it may introduce more or replace some of the activities of the real world {cite}`economic_times_04_2022`. 

The metaverse is backed by blockchain-based cryptocurrencies which act as a medium of exchange for the goods and services in the metaverse. In addition to them, the metaverse is blessed with NFTs to store the value of creator-centric content. 

There is a paradigm shift that is taking place from Web 2.0 architecture to Web 3.0 architecture. The new architecture will also demand a shift in business models and customer value proposition. The value creation opportunity for Web 3.0 companies is far too greater than that of Web 2.0 companies {cite}`mitselmakher_2021`. A whole lot of work is required to create a more functional economy in the metaverse. As of October 2021, the market capitalization of Web 2.0 metaverse is $14.8 trillion while that of Web 3.0 is $0.03 trillion. The number of users utilizing Web 3.0 virtual worlds is 50000.

## Some Important Stats

All the figures mentioned are updated as of June 2022.
-  The number of users utilizing Web 3.0 virtual worlds is 50000.
-  The global metaverse market is projected to grow from $100.27 billion in 2022 to $1,527.55 billion by 2029, at a CAGR of 47%.
-  While Europe is expected to grow with the highest CAGR, North America will hold the largest market share.