# The Metaverse Project

The concept of the Metaverse has been in the minds of humans for a long. But it is now that the technology has matured enough to realize its potential. The metaverse is the manifestation of the evolution of the internet. By removing the barrier of information flow, the internet has fueled the human impulse to socialize, communicate and nurture personal connections at scale. 

In the 1980s and ’90s, the internet’s growth enabled the introduction of online communication services such as CompuServe, America Online, and Prodigy. These services introduced users to digital communication through email, bulletin board messaging, and real-time online chatting {cite}`shah_2016`. The success of these services encouraged the introduction of social media networks like Six Degrees, Friendster, Blogger, etc. Then, modern social media networks emerged like LinkedIn, MySpace, Facebook, Google+, etc., with tons of new features {cite}`university_2021`. Even though these social networks bridged the geographical gap between the people, they lacked a few essential elements of human interaction — the most prominent being emotions and proximity - which evokes the feeling of liveliness. And this is what Metaverse strives to address. 

Metaverse is gaining a lot of traction these days. While some companies are actively evaluating the potential benefits of Metaverse, some have started investing resources to get into Metaverse. The major ones are Meta and Microsoft. But almost every company is keeping an eye on the development of Metaverse. It will be uneconomical to miss out on this new trend's opportunities. 